Japan in this battle is just taking
anybody, young boys, old people, whoever
they can put into that army they're
putting into it. If the Russians had run
one more battle against the Japanese,
the Japanese supply lines would have
collapsed. If Japan had demanded more at
those peace talks, Nicholas II would
have gone back to war and he would have
slaughtered them because he had all
these cracked troops that are just
sitting there and the Japanese literally
don't have the men. Little Japan defeats
the greatest land power of Asia, China.
Incredible. This uh effect on China was
far more devastating than the opium
wars. The Chinese like to talk about
these as being rebellions or uprisings.
Give me a break. They're civil wars. So,
I'm going to talk to you today about one
of the two great generations in modern
Japanese history. They are the Maji
generation named after the Maji emperor
here and that generation transformed
Japan into the only and the first and
the only non-western modern power in
that period. And the second great
generation of modern Japanese is of
course the post-war generation that
transformed their country into a global
powerhouse. And I'm going to ask a
question or try to both ask and answer
it is what caused the reversal of the
balance of power in Asia in the period
that I'm going to talk to you about it.
And it's a really consequential question
about why these tectonic changes take
place in the international system
because historically uh China had always
been uh the dominant
civilization in Asia from time in
memorial and then upstart Japan um winds
up doing things or China winds up doing
things and it reverses and has profound
effects and it's a very relevant
question in our own day when there's an
ongoing reversal of the reversal when
China is on the comeback and uh
threatening to put Japan back in its
box. So it's really interesting to ask
why how do these things happen? So
that's the background of what I'm
talking about. But if you think about
China back in the day before Japan
trounced China in the first SinoJapanese
war, Chinese believe that there's only
one civilization,
theirs naturally. And they believed that
of course it's the best because there's
only one that makes it easier to be the
best. But uh in in addition there if you
think about all levels of of human
endeavor Chinese institutions were
imitated throughout the east. It's the
richest country uh on the planet for
many many years. Um incredible
achievements in science, philosophy, you
name it. And also there was another
assumption that u people didn't make a
Uturn on the path to civilization. and
it's always forward towards Chinese
civilization. Well, Japan um by
westernizing is taking a U-turn on the
road to civilization. It's dumping uh
Chinese civilization. And so already we
got at least two civilizations out
there. And then when it transes China in
a war, uh it suggests to the Chinese
that they can't be better than the
Japanese at the military things at
least. And this uh effect on China was
far more devastating than the opium
wars. That you the Chinese could write
those off. The losses there, bunch of
crazy Europeans, they're irrelevant to
us. But when Japan did this, it
basically detonated the Confucian
underpinnings of Chinese civilization.
And the Chinese have been trying to find
a suitable replacement ever since. For a
while, they thought it was communism.
Maybe they still do. So I'm going to ask
a question. Why did the agent balance of
power change? And now, spoiler alert,
I'm going to give the answer. Um, and
I'm going to say clever decisions in
Tokyo. But I'm going to use a particular
framework to answer this that I have
found really useful and I learned it
from teaching at the Naval War College
where students are required to have a
counterargument in papers. And this is
um what I learned from doing this. So,
I'm going to have an argument which is a
thesis and then I'll have some data
supporting it. But then I'm not going to
quit there. I'm going to do find the
second best argument, the
counterargument, the absolutely best
alternate explanation, but not one that
I think is the best one. I'm going to
give you the best one. That's my thesis
and I'm going to go into that and it's
incredibly valuable particularly in our
own fraught uh political times where um
we need to hear each other out. You need
to hear out the counterargument of what
the other side is saying. And then what
you'll often find out in a
counterargument is that there are
actually some very valid points in it
and it leads you to think, oh well maybe
I need to adjust my own argument. So
changing your mind's a good idea if the
data comes in. Also, it gets you away
from monocausal explanations where you
come up with one cause, you think that's
it, time to quit. And if you're thinking
about the counter arguingment, you might
get other causes as well. Also, if
you're going to do something like on a
job and you have to recommend a course
of action, your thesis, you would better
anticipate what the counterargument is
going to be. And then the third part of
this is the rebuttal because you better
come into that um meeting your boss with
the re rebuttal in your back pocket so
that you can deal with people who are
saying you're wrong. And the rebuttal
cannot be a repetition of the original
argument because you know what? That's
annoying. Don't do that. Really
annoying. The most effective ones are
coming at the problem from a completely
different uh direction from either
argument or counterargument that then
shores up your argument. And my other
direction is I got a SinoJapanese
problem and I'm going to come around
with a Russia angle. So this is my game
plan of what I'm planning to do and the
analytical reasons for doing it. Okay.
So, I have a thesis which I'm going to
give to you uh when in emails and
written work and lectures like this one.
You really help people if you explain
exactly what you're up to and you do it
succinctly at the very beginning. So,
here it is. The Japanese leaders
westernized their institutions.
They integrated multiple instruments of
national power into a coherent strategy.
And then in the RussoJapanese war, they
quit that one exactly at the culminating
point of victory for maximum gains. And
together, these three things overturned
the balance of power in their favor.
That's my thesis. Short, sweet. You've
got it. Whether you agree with it or
not, we we will get there. Okay. So, now
I'm going to go to the first point.
First points, you should start with a
topic sentence. I'm going to start one.
Why am I doing this? This is these are
all signp posts to orient you to my
argument so that you can absorb it and
also if you don't like it you can see
very clearly the parts that you don't
like and we can get into a fun
conversation. So my topic sentence for
the westernization part is Japanese
leaders concluded that in order to parry
the threat of the industrial revolution
of all these imperial powers coming at
them was they needed to westernize their
institutions in order to protect their
national interest. That this was step
one. So that's my topic sentence. Okay.
So what's going on? The industrial
revolution started in England or uh
Britain more generally in the late 18th
century. It spreads to the continent
after the Napoleonic wars died down at
the beginning of the 19th century. By
the mid mid 19th century, it had reached
Asia and it's profoundly disruptive to
traditional societies whose uh
traditional security paradigms no longer
work when they're facing the weaponry of
the industrialized age coming at them.
And what the industrial revolution does
and why it's so revolutionary is it
produces compounded economic growth.
Traditional societies are pretty much
pretty stable. But when you do
compounding economic growth, the
difference in power and wealth becomes
stark between those who do and those who
don't. And it's also based not only on
technological changes, right? Whether
you've got all these fancy armaments and
railways and telegraphs, but it's also
based on institutions. What are
institutions? They're how we organize
each other. So when you think of
institutions, you think of the buildings
where people are, but that's not it.
It's the people in there who are working
on a shared project together, whatever,
or a shared area of activity. And uh
this is one of the hallmarks of Western
civilization. This is what the Romans
figured out of institutions and laws
that this is a way of really harnessing
people and it's profoundly powerful. So
I'll go into all of that. So, Japan's
looking at the world with this incoming
industrial revolution or or the powers
that have benefited from it and it's
watching its neighbor China being
defeated twice in war and they're
horrified, not just appalled. And um so
they're looking at it and going, you
know what, maybe we'll be next. And
they're right. The United States does
unto Japan what Britain and France did
unto China. What's that? the treaty port
system. What it meant is that trade in
Japan and China would take place in
designated treaty ports. That the west
would set tariffs on this trade and that
western citizens in China or Japan would
in these treaty ports would not be
subjected to Chinese or Japanese law but
home country law. And when Chinese and
Japanese citizens were in Europe or the
United States, they most certainly were
not dealing with home country law. They
were dealing with US or Western law. So
it was not reciprocal in any way. In
addition, each one of these treaties had
a most favored nation clause in it which
said the the the one who's negotiating
this treaty the most favored one.
Whatever they negotiate will be given to
everybody else. So it meant whatever one
could negotiate acred to them all. It
meant that China uh lost sovereign and
Japan lost their sovereignty when these
treaties go in. And so the Japanese,
unlike China, which fights war after war
with these westerners trying to defeat
them militarily and it's unsuccessful,
the Japanese say, "Whoa, whoa, whoa,
whoa. We're going to assess what the
nature of the problem is." And they sent
uh factf finding mission after factf
finding mission to Europe primarily, but
also the United States. This is just the
most famous one, the Wakura mission,
which is off to the west in the United
States as well in 1871. And they're
studying not only western military
instrument institutions but a whole
array of political, economic, legal,
social, educational, the works to
understand the basis for western power
and the problem that is hitting them.
And they arrive in Europe at a really
interesting time. It's when Otto van
Bismar is just finishing up the third
war of the unification of the Germanic
states and the Japanese thinko this
might be quite a model for us. Why?
Because Prussia transformed itself over
a succession of three wars from the
weakest of the five great European
powers to second only to Great Britain.
And it did so in part by unifying the
Germanic states into modern Germany. And
the Japanese are thinking, "Wow, this
might be relevant to us because we're
divided up into all these feudal domains
that we have just tried to glue
together. And what are the lessons to be
learned here?" And as they're thinking
about this and watching what Bismar is
up to, they come upon thinking about
institutions and technology
and moderniz. I'm going to use the words
in the following sense. Modernization
means uh adopting the most
state-of-the-art technology, whatever it
is, not just military technology uh but
all all manner of uh technology. And
westernization, the way I'm going to use
it, means adopting westernized
institutions. And I don't mean just
military institutions. I mean everything
from whether you westernize your
educational institutions or political
whatever it is. And the question is can
you have one without the other? Can you
modernize and have all the fancy uh
gadgets and things without having the
westernized institutions that the
societies that created these things had?
And if you think about it, this
dichotomy is still with us. There are a
lot of fighters in the Middle East and
North Africa who are more than happy to
use state-of-the-art technology, but the
last thing they want is westernized
institutions. And the Japanese when they
posed this question back in the day
decide asking whether you could have one
without the other they decided the
answer was no. They didn't particularly
like western culture but they believed
that in order to have uh to not only use
and import state-of-the-art technology
but become an independent producer of
it, you've got to do some degree of
westernization. So they get home, they
set themselves a policy objective, which
is to protect Japanese national security
and sovereignty in an age of
accelerating imperialism. And they come
up with a two-phase grand strategy to do
this. It's going to be start with a
domestic phase of westernization,
westernize your institutions, and then
they're going to when they're done with
that, they're going to have a foreign
policy phase, which is going to be about
starting an empire. Why do that? because
they look at all the powers of their day
and think what's a great power look like
in those days? Well, it has an empire.
So, they go, well, we're going to have
an empire. All right, these this is the
domestic phase. These are known as the
Maji reforms in honor of the emperor who
reigned in this period. It's between
1869 and 1890. It's a whole generation.
And if you look at them, they uh only
two of them pertain to the military.
There's the draft and then creating the
general staff. And then if you look at
the the two that start it all, they
start it at the top of the social
pyramid with the feudal domains, that's
the uh the power brokers of Japan, and
they're getting rid of all of those. And
then they go right to the bottom of the
social pyramid, which is children, and
deciding that they need to have
compulsory elementary education because
they don't believe you can have a modern
country, a strong country without a
literate population. But if you look at
the rest of these things, you're getting
a Bank of Japan. You're going to be
having something running your currency
and other things. You got a cabinet, a
higher education. You're going to have a
professional civil service constitution,
a parliament. You're going to have a
court system that looks like a western
court system with laws that look an
awful lot like Western laws. As a result
of doing all of this, the westerners had
no excuse left for having a treaty port
system because this mirrors what's going
on in the west. So Britain, which is the
precedent setter in these things, the
superpower of its day, it renegotiates
its treaties with Japan on the basis of
jeritical equality and the other powers
follow suit and do it. This happens in
Japan a half century before China gets
rid of its unequal treaties. All right.
So domestic phase is over the moment um
Japan signs that treaty with Britain.
The foreign policy phase has to do with
Japan believes it needs an empire and
its neighborhood is a mess. China is
imploding for various reasons which I
will get to. And Korea is even worse.
And China, because it's having a massive
civil wars throughout China, can no
longer fulfill its susan role to
stabilize Korea. And the Korean royal
house is busy mailing package bombs to
each other. I kid you not. They're
blowing each other up. What Japan is
terribly concerned about is that Russia
might try to fill this power vacuum. Why
would Japan think that? Well, it's the
Trans Siberian Railway that Russia
decides in 1891 it's going to build a
Trans Siberian railway to exactly what
there is no Russian population out
there. And Japan understands exactly
what it is. It's a bid for empire in
Asia because once Russia completes this
thing, it's going to overturn the Asian
balance of power because Russia is going
to be able to deploy troops where nobody
else can. Therefore, treaty revision
happens on the 16th of July, 1894.
That's when it's signed on the dotted
line with with Britain. 9 days later,
Japan fires the opening shots of the
first SinoJapanese war. And the Japanese
fight three wars of Russian containment.
I'm going to talk to you about the two
that went well for them today. The third
one's a whole other topic. The first
one's the first SinoJapanese war. when
little Japan defeats the greatest land
power of Asia, China. Incredible. The
second one, which I'll get to a decade
later, is the RussoJapanese War. When
the Japanese defeat, sorry, spoiler
alert, um Russia, the greatest land
empire of Europe. Amazing that they can
do this. And the third one does not go
nearly as well. That would be the second
SinoJapanese war from 1931 to 1945 that
morphs into World War II that ruins the
Japanese, but it's a different topic.
First SinoJapanese war to let you know
what happened in it. It's comprised of
two pairs of key battles. There are
other battles as well, but this is a
good way to understand it. The first
battle is at Pyongyang. The Japanese
defeat the Chinese army, which takes off
and retreats all the way over the border
river, which is the Yaloo, back into
Chinese territory. So, Japan has
actually achieved its war objective,
which was to remove Korea from the
Chinese sphere of influence. Battle
number one, they've already done it. And
the second battle occurs within the
week, the same week in midepptember
1894. It's the Battle of the Yaloo,
where the Japanese Navy trounces the
Chinese Navy, which believe it or not in
this day, both countries had
state-of-the-art navies. And Japan
trounces it and gets command of the sea.
That's terribly important for Japan. For
Japan to reach the theater here, it's
got to cross the sea. If there's a
hostile navy out and about, it can sink
troop transport, supplies, and other
things. So, it's very important to get
rid of hostile navy. Well, the reason he
gets command in the sea is because
Chinese decide they're never going to
engage with the with the Japanese navy
ever again, and they duck into port. Uh,
and the Japanese are going to solve that
problem for them. There are second pair
of battles which are fought over the
winter of 189495.
China only has one naval refitting
station where you can actually fix large
ships. That's at Port Arthur and they
will take it by land the same way
they're going to take it in the
Russo-Japanese war. The Chinese fleet
what's left of it flees to Weih highway
hang out in port. Japan lands an army on
the Shandong Peninsula there and also it
blockades with its navy and then the
army turns the landward guns on the
ships and port and they sink them all
and that is the end of that war. Okay,
here's what Japan got out of this war.
And what I've got is a very simple
framework, domestic, regional,
international. This is a way to help you
uh remember what I'm going to tell you.
Three-part frameworks are helpful for
getting information to other people.
Domestically, this victory in this war
validated a very controversial
westernization program. All those major
reforms, which sound so great in
retrospect, uh actually the Japanese
population didn't like them. Who wants
their kids being sent to uh elementary
school if they were working on the farm
before? And who wants this westernized
curriculum? Who likes westerners anyway?
And people are wearing all this western
clothing and stuff. It's crazy land. Why
would anyone like that? Uh once Japan
wins this war and trounces China, a lot
of Japanese have a second thoughts about
this. They're quite proud of their
achievements and it vastly increases the
prestige of the military, particularly
the army. And this is going to have bad
follow-on effects for civil military
relations because it's going to increase
military power over civil power. But it
takes a while to play out. Regionally,
Japan's replacing China as the dominant
power and Japan's getting the beginnings
of its empires, Taiwan and the
Pescadors. Internationally, Japan
becomes a recognized great power. And
what's my proof? It would be the 1902
Anglo-Japanese Alliance, which is
Britain's only long-term alliance
between the Napoleonic Wars and World
War I alliance with Japan. However, this
war gets the eye of Mordor turned on to
them because Russia is going, "Whoa!
uh rising power in Asia, potential
two-front war problem for us with Europe
in the West and whatever the Japanese
think they're doing. And that triggers a
RussoJapanese arms race and Russia, the
eye of mortar terms from Europe to Asia
and that's going to uh be problematic.
So now my transition sentence, I've done
part number one. uh not only did Japan
westernize its institutions in order to
overturn the balance of power, but it
also mastered grand strategy and
integrated multiple instruments of
national power. And here we go on that
one. Marshall uh Yamagatada who was the
writer of war plans for the very
successful Sino-Japanese war. Uh he
predicted another war within the decade
and the Russo-Japanese war came right on
time and in the meantime Japan prepared
for war and it integrated uh such
instruments of national power as
diplomacy, intelligence, military,
economics. I'm going to go through each
in turn starting with diplomacy. Here
you have Sununza who's China's big g
guru art of war who's talking about it's
really important to disrupt alliances in
modern terminology that would be
isolating the adversary that that might
be a good thing to do and that's the
purpose of the AngloJapanese
alliance how does that work what it says
its terms say that if more than one
European power comes to Asia to fight
Japan that means Russia plus one
European buddy then Brit Britain is
going to weigh in on Japan's side. So
Britain is the number one power in
Europe. So why would you ever want to
help Russia out because it won't go well
with you if Britain is on Japan's side?
This alliance goes into effect from 1902
to 1907. It's a 5-year event opening a
window of opportunity for Japan to sort
out its empire in Asia. But the Trans
Siberian Railway when it gets completed
is going to threaten to close that
window. And here's why. The Trans
Siberian Railway in those days, it's not
north of the Amir. It's actually
straight through Manuria, this Chinese
Eastern Railway. It's a Russia's bid for
empire of trying to control Manuria. And
it was unfinished. Uh it hadn't been
double tracked. So that means you're
always having to push push trains off so
other trains can pass them in the other
direction. It's missing its lake by call
link. Don't think lake, think
Switzerland. Lake Bal is about the size
of Switzerland. And the Boxer Rebellion,
the al Qaeda of their day, and I'll get
to them, uh, had destroyed much of the
track, really upsetting the Russians. As
a result of all of this, at the
beginning of the RussoJapanese War,
which begins in 1904, the carrying
capacity of that railway was only 20 or
to 40,000 men per month to the front. By
the end of the war, the last battle,
it's a 100,000 men per month. If those
numbers had have been available at the
beginning of the war, Japan would have
faced numerically uh superior Russians
from start to finish and would have been
in a world of hurt. So, Japan has got a
a window of opportunity that it's
worrying about uh sorting things out. In
addition, Japan engages in a really big
military buildup. It gets a really big
indemnity from the first SinoJapanese
war and it spends it and that spending
is finished in around 1901 meaning it's
about ready to go to war. At the time
the war breaks out, Russian naval assets
in Asia were about 3/4 those of Japan
but Russia was s uh scheduled to surpass
Japan's naval assets uh by about 1905.
Again, you could see this window of
opportunity threatening to shut. So if
you look at it, Japan's window of
opportunity of getting its empire if
that's what it thinks it wants. You got
to have treaty vision v vision in place.
You've got to isolate Russians, make
sure that there's going to be no other
power interfering in these things. You
got to have your rearmament program. But
look, this window is very short. It's
going to close in 1905ish.
And the when you think of windows of
opportunities, what they mean is
whatever it is you plan to do has to be
completed before it slams shut. If
you're on the wrong side of the window,
which is what happens to Japan in the
second son of Japanese war, you are in a
world of hurt. In addition, what it
means is actually time is on the side of
your adversary. It is a sign of
weakness, not strength. The Japanese are
looking at the Russians who are
procrastinating. The Japanese are
telling them, hey, we will trade uh
recognition of your dominance of Manuria
if you'll u recognize our dominance in
Korea. The Russians didn't want to do
anything. They're procrastinating and
trying to go beyond this window and the
Japanese are thinking we got to sort it
out before that happens. So another
element of national power are psycholog
SCOPS as the US military likes to call
them, psychological operations. And the
Japanese were engaged in a really wide
array of them both at the front in
Russian and across the Russian Empire.
At the front, the Japanese were
secretreting in all kinds of postcards
for the Russian recruits there showing
the the great life as a P and rather
posh Japanese accommodations as opposed
to the really bad life of getting
disabled or killed in the front.
Meanwhile, Russia was the only I think
there are only three European countries
including Russia that lacked a
legislature in this period. I think
Montenegro is one of them and maybe the
Ottoman Empire might be the other one.
Japan had a legislature. Russian
population is sick of it. The war wasn't
going well and they start hitting the
streets in the Russian Revolution and
Japan wants to advertise that to the
troops. You want things to be stirred up
in Russia so that Russia has to pull
troops back into European Russia. So
they're doing all of that. And then um
this gentleman, he was a colonel back in
the day, Colonel Akashi, but he's a
general by the time this picture is
taken of him. He's working in the
Japanese logation in Stockholm and he's
busy cutting checks to Finnish and
Polish revolutionaries who are part of
the Russian Empire and want out trying
to stir things up there to have Russia
uh have to be forced to pull the troops
out of Asia and then the Japanese have
this gentleman in there employed a lot
of other people. Yukai, he is key in
overthrowing theQing dynasty. He becomes
China's first president. But back in the
day, he's running reconnaissance
missions for the Japanese, telling them
what the Russians are up to. And then um
and when little detachments of Russian
troops try to go out and about, um these
people are harassing them, which doesn't
help Russian morale. Also, the Japanese
are being really good about purchases
from Manurian. They aren't just taking
things from people, they're actually
paying. So they're triggering an
economic boom in Manuria, which means
locals like them. And then um the
Japanese also figure how to tap into
Russian fleet communications. So they
know where the Russian fleet is most
convenient. So this is the information
element of national power. And then
there's economics. Two-fifths of this
war for the Japanese side is paid
for with loans. So if they don't get the
loans, they can't wage the war. In fact,
one of the reasons Russia has to call it
quits at the end of the war is when it
tries to raise a final loan uh it
failed. No one no one will pay for it.
But the Japanese
uh loans depend on battlefield success
as do interest rates. So if you excess
successful in the field, the interest
rates go down. So Japan is doing quite
well with all of this. So, um, if you
sum it all up, you can go the Japanese
use diplomacy to isolate their adversary
with this UK alliance. They use all
these psychological operations to
promote revolution and uh, desertions.
They're using the military uh,
instrument to fund their rearmament. And
then they've got the economics going
with all of these loans. The US military
is really partial to a Reagan era
acronym of dime, right? You can see here
that D is for diplomacy, I is for
information, M is for military, E is
economics. Sounds like a bad, I don't
know, cheerleading routine. Um, it's
inadequate. Uh, it may be a place to
start. It's cute and all that stuff, but
cute does not mean complete. Think about
it. One of the most important factors in
this war, bar none, certainly for
Russia, is railways. I don't see an R in
there or uh anything. So, by all means,
this is better than only looking at
military factors, but it's incomplete.
>> YouTube shorts have been a really great
tool for us for bringing new viewers to
our main interviews. For example, if a
guest is talking about a historical
event, we'll take a snippet of the
conversation and then just use the real
archival footage to bring it to life.
But when they dive into hypothetical
situations, that can be hard to
visualize. For example, I recently
interviewed Steven Cochin about Joseph
Stalin. And Cochin started this
hypothetical dialogue between two Soviet
era co-conspirators.
>> And I come to you and I say, "This
Stalin guy, he's wrecking everything."
>> We wanted to feel like you were really
there in the room while this was
happening. So, we generated a picture of
a Soviet official and we prompted
Google's VO3 to have him say Cockkins
line. This Stalin guy,
he's wrecking everything.
>> This was literally a one shot and it
handled everything perfectly, including
the pause. So, we edited the video in
and lip-s synced it to Cochan's line.
>> And I come to you and I say, "This
Stalin guy, he's wrecking everything. We
got to take him down."
>> Try V3 on the Gemini app with Google's
AI Pro plan, or get the highest access
with the Ultra plan. Sign up at
gemini.google.
Okay, back to Sarah.
>> So, I've talked about Japan's
westernization and I've talked about it
mastery of grand strategy. And now
here's my third reason of how they how
they overturn the balance of power. And
it has to do with pegging the
culminating point of victory in the
Russo-Japanese war. And now for a
commercial break, I'm going to give you
some terminology which are culminating
point of attack, culminating point of
victory. They're different. Culminating
point of attack is an operational term.
If you do not reach your culminating
point of attack, it means you could have
gone further. And it applies the
culminating point of attack applies to a
single battle or a set of battles which
would be called a campaign. So if you
don't go far enough in your battle, you
could have taken more territory,
whatever it was you were after. If you
go too far, so imagine you're going deep
into whatever territory it is. Your
lines are ever more extended. Your
enemy's lines are probably being
shortened. Your supply problems are
getting worse. Theirs might be getting
better. If you go way too far, their
enemy will launch a counterattack that
will send you much further backwards
than if you'd been a little more
cautious about how far you went. So
that's an operational term. The
strategic term is commoning point of
victory. And it concerns the objective
for which the war was fought. Japan's
fighting this war in order to protect
its sovereignty. become a great power to
do that. If you don't go far enough and
uh if you don't reach your culminating
point, you could have gotten greater
winnings. If you go too far, typically
what'll happen is you will trigger a
third-party intervention. And what may
have been feasible before that third
party joined the party uh may no longer
be. So, uh this is this is the point of
the terminology. commercial grade is
over and let's get going on the the uh
RussoJapanese War. Here's a nice map of
it. So, it starts out with a Japanese
surprise attack on Port Arthur Lucun,
modern name. I'm using a traditional
name. It's on the Lao Peninsula. This is
the main Russian base. The Japanese have
to get those ships in base and sink them
even better because their supply lines
are in danger if that navy's out and
about. Simultaneously, they land an army
in Korea that's going to go northwest
into Manuria. And if you look at the
railway line, it goes Port Arthur all
the way to Harbin up there. That's the
east west uh junction uh of the Trans
Siberian Railway. In those days, that's
the Chinese Eastern Railway. And I've
only listed a couple of the major
battles, but basically it's going up the
railway system from Port Arthur upward.
And you got the Leo Yang and Mukden. And
Japan has got only four armies until the
very end of the war when it gets a
fifth. And one army, as long as Port
Arthur has ships in it, it has to be
stuck there besieging it. And Japan's uh
theory of victory in this thing is to
have an annihilating battle. That's what
um Bismar had done to the French in the
battle of Sudan. And so the Japanese
really need to get that army out of Port
Arthur so that it can concentrate on
these other battles. What happens is
Russia keeps losing the battles, but it
has an orderly retreat, moving ever
further northward, extending Japanese
lines. So that's an overview of how the
war goes. So you can orient the the rest
of the conversation here. If you look at
the invasion routes that Japan uses in
the first SinoJapanese war and the
Russo-Japanese war, they're remarkably
similar because guess what? The
geography hasn't changed. And so if you
want to send an army in to desired
locations, they may well have to take
similar routes. And uh the British, the
French, the Americans, Japanese had
studied very carefully the first
SonaJapanese War. But the apparently the
Russians didn't waste their time on it
because here's what's up.
If the Russians had studied it
carefully, they would have known the
Yaloo River is lethal to send an army
across that. that if there's an army
waiting for it on the other side, the
Russians also would have realized that
this funue pass and the Mian pass, Mian
means literally scratch the skies that
if you're prepared there, you're going
to ruin an army coming through. Of
course, the Russians aren't prepared
there. And then they also would have
known the Laung Peninsula, it has a very
narrow neck. If you cut the narrow neck,
which is right where Dali is, a big
commercial port, you're going to get
that port, which is connected to the
railway, and you're going to be able to
supply your armies going right up north.
In addition, it means you're probably
going to get Port Arthur, the big naval
base as well, because it's basically
been turned into an island, and you'll
probably get that. So, the Russians
should have figured out that they uh but
they didn't. The Japanese literally
blast through these locations. And here
is the key to reducing the fleet in Port
Arthur. Since the Russians wouldn't
sorty, they're just sticking in in
harbor. So the Japanese have to figure
out a way to do it. Here's how it works.
They have to get a bunch of these 11in
howitzers in place. Japan didn't own
many of these. They're really heavy.
It's really hard to transport them with
horses and things. They've got to put
them behind the hills in Port Arthur.
And then they've got to take the high
point, which is they takes them a while
to figure out. than they needed to do.
This is 203 m hill. You put a spotter on
203 m hill. This thing starts firing
shots and the spotter starts radioing in
how you have to adjust the line of fire
in order to hit the ships and harbor. So
that's what's going on here. Here you
can see the narrow neck there above
Dali. You can see it's a big port where
you put a lot of ships but not a very
protected port. The star is where Port
Arthur is and that is a protected port
where you'd want to put naval vessels.
And you can see it takes the Japanese
two months to work their way down the
Leaong Peninsula to get themselves in
position to blow away the ships in port.
Uh meanwhile, Japanese armies are having
a hard time while this is going on. It
could be argued that maybe they even
reached their culminating point of
attack in the Battle of Loyang. Who
knows? La Yang takes place less than
halfway through the war. It's in early
September 1904 and Japanese munitions,
uh, numbers of officers, numbers of
horses, it all goes critical. They don't
have enough. They get away with it. Um,
they win the battle, but they don't, the
Russians have an organized retreat
northward. And at the Battle of Shaka,
which happens next in in October, the
Japanese supply system almost collapses,
but they get away with it. And so, um,
bad things are going on at land. Uh,
Japan doesn't have an infinite supply of
soldiers. So, you can also look, they
don't have an infinite supply of
artillery howers and things. Here are
their gun imp placements. Notice the
green ones are army guns imp placements
around Port Arthur. That makes sense.
What's all the purple? They have so few
guns, they're pulling them off ships in
order to reduce Port Arthur. And all
these things they really need up in
Manuria. They need Noi, General Nogi,
who's running all of this, his army up
in Manuria. And there you can see the
circle is where 203 meter hill is that
they need to take that as well. All
right. So, General Nogi who is
commanding the third army which is in uh
charge of the siege. He is really
desperate to take to reduce uh the
fortress as soon as possible. And he
runs four different really costly
infantry assaults on a fortress where
you're killing lots of Japanese uh young
men. and he chose them the first two
occur right prior to major battles
Liaoyang and Shaha respectively
um because he wants to win those battles
uh win Port Arthur so then he can take
his guns and troops to fight at le
well it's not to be because he loses
both of them uh the the assaults are
insufficient and it's only after the
second one that he realizes the
importance of 203 meter hill the problem
is noi gets 45,000 Japanese soldiers
killed doing this. 45,000 soldiers in
that day is an entire army. And I've
already pointed out that Japan only had
four armies until the very end of the
war when it tries to cobble together a
fifth one. Here's what the what 203
meter hill looks like from down below.
Here's what it looks like from up top.
The kind of view you get when there was
a truce in early December 1904 and there
was some talking between Japanese and
Russian officers. Russian officers said,
"You will never capture 23 23 meter
hill." To which the Japanese officer
replied, "We'll purchase it in blood."
And they did. And their gamble paid off
because all these ships, you'll notice
they're listing. It's because of they
ain't sailing anywhere. The 203 meter
hill they take at the end of November
and within the week they are now sinking
all of these battleships and they're
gone within a few days. and the Russ the
Russians uh give up at Port Arthur and
the third army is up in and heading into
Manuria where it'll be there for the
battle of Mukden which is a huge battle.
It's got what 500,000 troops but even so
Russia can muster
125,000 more troops than Japan can.
Japan in this battle is just taking
anybody uh young boys, old people,
whoever they can put into that army
they're putting into it. And you could
argue that they're well beyond their
culminating point of attack. But for
incompetent Russian strategy, if the
Russians had run one more battle against
the Japanese, uh their Japanese supply
lines would have collapsed and it's
unclear how far down uh the Leo Dong
Peninsula they would have had to
retreat. Um so uh this is when uh
Japan's war termination plan goes into
effect. The Japanese realized from the
very beginning that they had a
high-risisk highreward strategy and in
contrast to World War II, they had a
really carefully prepared exit strategy.
So when Prime Minister Itto Hiaboomi is
convening the cabinet and they're going
to make the decision to fire the first
shots in this war, he has already lining
up a Harvard grad here, Viscount Keko,
who was an acquaintance of President
Theodore Roosevelt of the United States,
then president. And what they want is to
have Viscount Keko um work on getting
Roosevelt ready to do mediation at the
end of this war. And the the peace
treaty is going to be held in
negotiations gonna be held in Portsouth,
New Hampshire. Negotiated by another
Harvard alumnist, Baron Kamura, who's
going to do all of that. Meanwhile, Itto
sends his son-in-law, who's a diet
member, but also a graduate of Cambridge
University off to Britain to keep the
Anglo-Japanese alliance solid. So, the
Japanese are very aware that you got to
have a way out of this thing. So it's in
the battle of Mukden that uh Phil
Marshall Yamagod decides it's time to
call the American card at at this
moment. He said look the amni is never
going to request peace unless we have
invaded Moscow or St. Petersburg
something he knows to be impossible. And
he doesn't assess me. He said look the
enemy cell has powerful forces in its
home country. We have already exhausted
ours. Second while the enemy still does
not run out of officers. We have lost a
great number since the opening of uh the
war and cannot easily replace them. At
this moment the Russian army was three
times the size of the Japanese army and
that army in theater was inre
increasingly comprised of crack soldiers
not the the kind of colonial kind of of
soldiers they'd started out with. And so
this here's the field marshal Yamagada
who in the first SinoJapanese war
because the government in Tokyo was
afraid he was going to march on Beijing
and do regime change they pulled him out
of theater and gave him a synicure to
make sure he didn't do that. Uh this
time he's a wiser man. He goes we must
now be prudent. And here are our other
members of this brilliant magi
generation. The chief of staff of the
manurian army said look if you start a
fire you got to put it out. And here is
the field marshal Oyama who is the
commander of Manurion forces. But before
he sets out to take command, he tells
the Navy minister, "I will care for
fighting Manuria, but I'm counting you
as the man to tell me when to quit." So
the Navy is going to be the fire
department, apparently. To tell you what
the Navy was up to, they took Elliot
Island to turn it into a cruiser base,
and that's how they're running the
blockade operations on Port Arthur of
keeping the Russian fleet in until they
can eventually sink it there. In
addition, the Imperial Japanese Navy is
busy laying mines. A lot of ships go
down to mines. So, this is an
interesting story. So, Nicholas IIR of
Russia doesn't much like it that his
fleet is just sitting in port not doing
anything. And so, he sends Admiral
Macarov out there to assume command. And
I've had the uh misfortune to read
Macarov's major literary contribution,
which is all about naval strategy. And
he's a real hero in Russia. But then I
read his book. It's unbelievable. He
It's If you face a big ship, what do you
do? A more powerful ship, you attack. If
it's a smaller ship, what do you do? You
attack. It's like, okay, one
sizefits-all. I mean, how unanalytical.
Uh, here's what happens to him. He comes
in theater and within the month, another
spoiler alert, he's dead. How did that
happen? Uh, he followed his strategy.
That's how it happened.
What he does, he arrives. Everyone's
really excited because he's getting the
guys out and thinking they're going to
be doing things. But on April 12th, the
evening before he dies, there are a
bunch of Japanese ships laying mines out
of the harbor's entrance and he mistakes
them for Russian ships and tells his
people, "Don't fire on them." Oops. And
the next morning when he sorted with the
whole fleet to be part of his, we're
going to always take the offensive.
Well, they didn't sweep the harbor
insurance for mines. his ship hits a
mine and he goes down with a ship. All
right, that is a tactical error and he's
a dead man because of it. However,
there's a much more strategic
error that follows. Two weeks later,
Nicholas II decides to send his Baltic
fleet named for the Baltic. That's where
it is. Um, all the way around to come
and relieve the siege at Port Arthur in
order to avenge all of this thing. Okay.
What's the problem with that plan? Well,
that's the problem with that plan,
right? It's a long way to go. There is
no air conditioning for the sailors,
right? They come from northern clims. By
the time they arrive, they're mutinous.
Their ships are covered with barnacles,
which means they don't move very fast.
Meanwhile, once Port Arthur has fallen,
the Japanese immediately reship their n
refit their navies, so they're good to
go. And um so the way this blunder plays
out, well if you think about Britain,
Britain will do these worldwide
adventures. But they had a complete
basing system across the globe so that
their ships had coing stations. They
could uh refit, put more water on, give
people some RNR time uh uh relaxation
and things. Uh, and also the British
were very careful uh to fight on their
own terms with ever possible. You don't
want to fight on the enemy's terms.
Well, guess what? You're going to be
fighting right next to Japan barnacle
chips and mutinous crews. Uh, that's not
going to go well for you. And the
Japanese know because now that Port
Arthur falls while this uh expedition is
taking place. So then the purpose of the
expedition is no longer there. They
should have taken a U turn and go home,
but no, no, no, they're going to keep on
going. So there is only one other
possible location for them, which is a
inferior base up at Vladivosto. So the
Japanese know there are three ways to
get to Vladivosto. If you're coming up
from the south, you're either going to
go the long long way around through the
Puru straight and it's awfully narrow
and it's the long way around. You can go
through the Sugaru straight, which is a
little wider, but it goes by by a bunch
of big Japanese army bases and also a
very large port of Hakodate. I want to
do that. That's kind of risky. So, the
short way is to go through the Korea
Strait, which is broken in the middle by
the Tsushima Islands. And the Tsushima
Strait is to the east. It's 20 to 25
miles wide at its narrowest point. And
that's the short way, which is what the
Russians take. And guess what? They have
a welcoming party there of all these
newly refitted Japanese ships that know
exactly what they're up to. And the
Battle of Tsushima is one of the most uh
lopsided naval battles in human history.
The Japanese just either sink or
commandeer basically the entire fleet.
Uh proving the Russians had no idea of
how to uh do naval strategy that the
Navy had been a product of a bunch of
aristocrats who uh the one who ran it
was a guy who was uh known for what was
it? Fast women and slow ships. Um
it did not work out well for them. All
right. While the negotiations were being
held whe on whether to hold
negotiations, President Roosevelt
suggested to the Japanese that they try
to take Sakalene Island. You can see the
tip end of the Japanese home island,
Hokkaido, and then there's Sakalene.
Why? Because it's much more valuable to
the Russians than the Japanese. It'll be
a good tradeback item in the peace
negotiations because for Japan, it's a
nice fishing ground, but for Russia,
it's sovereign Russian territory.
horrors seating that sovereign Russian
territory to anyone let alone an Asian
power given the um prejudices of the
day. All right, to sum up what Japan got
out of this war, it got its immediate
war objective, uh, Russian troop
withdrawal from Aaria. That's what they
wanted. And they get this Japanese
sphere of, uh, influence in Korea.
That's what they wanted. But guess,
remember at the very beginning, they
wanted to trade Japanese predominance in
Korea for Russian predominance in
Manuria. Whoa. Well, look what they
really got. They got the southern half
of Sahalen Island, Russian territory.
They got southern Manuria and it's
actually arguably the valuable half, the
southern half because that has Port
Arthur and Dali and all the railways
that Russian had um invested there and
then it confirms the outcome of the
first SinoJapanese war that Japan is
indeed the dominant power of Asia. So um
I rest my case Japan did it. Smart
decisions in Japan is what overturned
the balance of power in Asia.
Okay, but I promised you a
counterargument. What would a smart
person say who disagrees with me and
here's a a perfectly good
counterargument which would say, "Yeah,
it's great you think the Japanese are so
clever, but actually China faced a
perfect storm of catastrophes and
because China imploded,
that's why it leaves Japan on top in
Asia. The primary factor is that China's
falling apart and the this perfect storm
of problems. I'll go through three. It's
always a good number. People can
remember three things. Talking about the
civil wars afflicting China uh that in
an age of in accelerating European
imperialism and also the Manchus who ran
China, they're only 2% of the population
were suffering from all kinds of
dynastic decline which I will get into.
China had reached its pre-industrial
limits to growth. its population kept on
going up and up, but its agricultural
productivity just could not feed people.
And so people are trying to farm really
marginal lands. Either they're too
vertical or they're don't have uh
reliable rainfall and you're getting
massive soil erosion doing these things.
And you're also getting a lot of
famines. And famines uh are both the
cause and the effect of civil wars. And
this map you can just see I've named
some of the big rebellions on this one.
is to give you a sense that these
rebellions affect all of China. Not just
a little here and there, but a lot of
everywhere. And I'm now I'm going to
give you a table and this is a
simplified table only goes 1845 to 1895.
It's part of a much bigger table that
would cover the entire 19th century. And
that table is an oversimplification. So
the point is this is not business as
usual. In the red uh box that is the
height of these rebellions, 1851 to
1878. The biggest rebellion in there is
the Taipings. It's estimated that 20
million people died in the Taiping
Rebellion. To put that figure in
perspective, and people know don't know
how many people died in all these
things. China didn't know how many
people they had, much less how many
people they lost. But to give you a
sense of it, in World War II, it's
estimated that 55 million people died.
So, you're talking 20 million just in
the Taipings. And I have no idea how all
this adds up, but it's huge. The Chinese
like to talk about these as being
rebellions or uprisings. Give me a
break. their civil wars. Um, a whole
bunch of them want to overthrow the
dynasty in Beijing. A whole other set of
them want to secede from the empire.
Often these minority people who just
want the Han the predominant uh people
to go away or the Manchus in this era.
So um some of these provinces are
devastated for generations. Okay. So
that's point one, these civil wars.
Point two is this coincided with an era
of accelerating European imperialism
where Europeans and also the Japan
Japanese are carving out massive spheres
of influence for themselves. So the
Chinese are not going to have
sovereignty over their country full
sovereignty for a very very long time.
And the story the worst part gets even
worse. This happens to China because
China loses a succession of regional
wars. It loses the first Opium War, the
second Opium War. The Japanese uh snag
the Ryuku Islands and then in the Sino
French war, uh China loses control over
Indo-China. And then in the SinoJapanese
war, they're losing their tributary of
Korea. The Elie crisis is up in Shing
Jang goes a little better for them. Uh
this is a mess. This is not business as
usual. This is uh think about one
country being afflicted by this much
trouble. And then it comes at a time
when the Manchus are in real trouble
themselves. They had ridden to power on
these fabulous cavalries and in
tremendous operational success for a
people who are only 2% of the population
that they dominate and they transform
China into the richest polity around the
globe by the 18th century. But here's
the problem with their tremendous
success in their military campaigns.
They're overextending China financially.
Inside the round circle there, that's
China proper. These are the core
provinces of China that produce all the
income. But the Manchus came in from
Manuria up there, but they also take
Mongolia, Shen Jang, and Tibet. The
areas that cost, not Manuria so much,
but the other ones, they cost a lot of
garrisoning. Uh it cost a lot of money
to garrison these places. And so it
looks like a great success, but it's
going to have problems later on. And
then here's what happens to the Manchu
emperors. They no longer ride at the
head of their armies. The Chenlong
emperor who's considered to be uh who
ruled at the uh the height of the
dynasty. What's he spending his money
on? All sorts of interesting
architectural programs. And that's why
people think he's great. Builds
beautiful things. But these emperors are
isolated. They don't have command
experience, extensive spending habits,
and then it gets better. So they got all
these tributaries. Some of their
tributaries produce really high quality
opium.
And the emperors decide they want to
sample the goods. And the people who are
preparing it for them also want to
sample the goods. And then the Manchu
banner forces that are the Ptorian guard
of the Manchus are also sampling the
goods. And then you go, why are the
lastQing emperors incapable of producing
offspring or have hardly any? Because
they have huge harms. So what's their
problem? Well, if you're really totally
high on drugs, you can ruin yourself.
And so that is what goes on. No wonder
they're losing these wars. If um some of
your key thinkers are not thinking very
clearly. So the counterargument to my
argument says, look, it's nonsense. I
mean, the Japanese may have been really
clever, but this is the real big event
is this massive series of civil wars,
uh, European imperialism, and, uh, the
collapse of my Manchu minority rule.
That would be the real thing. Now, if I
leave my argument here, I've just shot
myself in the foot because I've just
decimated my original argument with a
pretty good counterargument, and that
would be bad. That would hurt. So, you
need to do a rebuttal. and and it's
really good to come from a unexpected
direction. So I'm going to try my
direction which is going to be Russia
and say look Russia is the catalyst.
It's it's taking advantage of the
collapse of China and it's going to
catalyze things in a way there's that
Japan is going to leverage and it's
going to be Japan leveraging the these
things that proves that smart decisions
in Tokyo answers the question. So what's
going on with Russia? Russia has always
uh tries to expand its territory. It is
today the largest country on the planet.
Why they need more territory, nobody
knows. But that's what they're after.
And in these days, what they're taking
are those two large areas. And by the
time the Bolevixs finish working their
magic, Russians have taken from the
Chinese sphere of influences. The
Bolshevixs are beyond today, but uh
gives you a sense. They took more
territory from Chinese fear of influence
than the United States east of the
Mississippi. There's a lot of territory.
But in this day, while the opium wars
are going on and while the Taiping and
Yen rebellions, the two big ones are
happening simultaneously, the Russians
go to theQing and say, "Hey, we'll deal
with those foreigners for you. We'll be
intermediary, but just sign on the
dotted line for these treaties, giving
us all this land." And the Chinese were
vague on uh geography and they didn't
believe in treaties. They thought they'd
get it back later. So Russia gets all
this stuff, does exactly nothing because
we know about the treaty port system and
the British and French got all of it and
Russia got this stuff too. Once Russia
gets this stuff, that's why they want
the railway because they want to
integrate it in there. So the Trans
Siberian railway is the blue thing, but
understand that the blue part that's
above the green part that wasn't built
until World War I. Russia builds the
green part which is the Chinese eastern
railway the name of it in order to stake
out its uh its plans for empire and also
notice it wants the warm water port
that's the orange part going down to
Port Arthur because Vladivasto prior to
the age of ice breakers is frozen solid
several months of the year so Russia's
building this railway save on
construction costs is more direct going
straight across Manuria contain Japan
stake out its claim to Manuria the
Japanese get it right well That was
earlier in this lecture. They see this
coming and they don't like it. And then
uh in addition, what's going on? The
Chinese don't particularly like all the
imperialists messing with their country.
And so the boxers is another rebellion.
And these folks want all Westerners out
of China. And they want to kill any
stragglers. And they go into they're all
over China. They go into Manuria and the
Russians send a 100,000 troops, far more
than any of the European powers or even
Japan sends a lot to the rest of China
to get the to defeat the boxers, which
they do. And then the other Westerners
in Japan remove their troops. Russia
doesn't. And this is the thing that gets
uh Japan's attention because Russia's
got a 100,000 troops in Manuria that
won't leave. And that's when Japan is
sick of Russia procrastinating and um
we're going to wind up getting into the
Russo-Japanese war. So guess what? We're
back to my original uh explanation,
right? The Japanese finessed all of this
and they wind up on top and it's uh by
being very thoughtful in their grand
strategy that um they reverse the
balance of power. So, I'm gonna end this
thing with General Noi. General Nogi is
the one who oversaw the four assaults on
Port Arthur. He lost both of his sons in
this war. One in the battle of Nonshan,
which is down the Ladon Peninsula, and
then his other, his favorite, under his
command in Port Arthur. When the war was
over, he asked the Maji Emperor if he
could commit ritual suicide, and the
emperor said no. So when the Maji
emperor died, he and his wife did. And
this poem helps explain why. Imperial
troops a million strong conquered an
arrogant enemy. But siege and field
warfare left a mountain of corpses
ashamed. What face can I show to old
parents? How many men have returned this
day of triumphal song? Uh wars bring
much sorrow. And so I leave you with
that. And thank you very much for your
attention.
I loved this lecture especially and this
topic especially because it's about a
conflict that many of us weren't
educated on but adds context to the
other ones which are obviously super
famous like World War II adds context to
the development of these powers which
are the most powerful in Asia. So I'm
not going to keep wasting time. I just
want to jump into asking you a bunch of
questions about this. Okay. Um, one way
you can explain Russia's loss here is
that Japan had better tactics. And so
given the fact that they had deployed
similar amounts of men to the front,
Japan with their better tactics was able
to win. They in these different battles.
But maybe the more important thing to
explain is why Russia didn't deploy more
men or didn't deploy its greater
resources. It Russia's population is
over 130 million people at this point.
Japan's is 47 million or so. Well, you
might say it's the Trans Siberian
Railway isn't completed by this point,
but in 1905 it actually is complete. Um,
and so Russia
could have continued the war. It has all
these fresh troops they could send. So
then the question is why didn't they
have the same will to or the same
ability to muster resources their
massive resources that Japan brought to
bear?
>> Well,
one is the the railway is a bottleneck.
Japan's starting their war deliberately
before while that bottleneck is bottled.
Uh so that's one factor. Russia has
massive troops. Also the Russians are
arrogant, right? They think Japanese uh
initially the the Russians think they're
going to do regime change in Tokyo.
That's their plan. How they plan to get
to co Tokyo is a mystery, but never
mind. And so they don't realize what
they need. It's it's a very common
problem um in wars is gross
underestimation of the other side.
Right? That's what's going on in Ukraine
right now. Putin missed that one. He's
not the only one, right? Hitler uh
underestimated the Russians in World War
II. And then you go, well, why is
everybody what's going on with Japan?
And it had a really those major reforms,
they have an educated population.
Russia's soldiers are a bunch of
illiterates. And the Russian soldiers
are going, "What? Why are we fighting in
Manuria? Tell me precisely why I'm here
getting killed." Uh the the Russian
soldiers had no buy in. And uh you can
ask what exactly did the Russians want
there? Apparently, there were some royal
uh favorites who thought that they were
going to get some lucrative timber
concessions on the Korean border. Okay,
let's go into the logistics. I've never
heard there was a shortage of wood in
European Russia ever. Then they're going
to ship it all the way back. Uh this is
a non-performing uh economic model. Uh
in addition,
uh Nicholas II is an incompetent ZAR.
Uh I mean, and he's hiring the uh the
guy who's running the Navy is also
incompetent. Their uh Navy gets no
training whatsoever. So great, you have
expensive ships, but no one's trained in
how to use them, whereas the Japanese
have. And the Japanese, um, it's the
value of the object, one of these
concepts. Uh, how valuable is it to win
for Japan versus Russia? Well, for
Russia, it's already the biggest country
in the planet, and there's nothing
really that exciting out in Asia from
their point of view. Val maybe for
Nicholas because he wants to be a great
zar and add to the empire. That would be
a nice thing. But when the Germans come
after him in World War II, World War I,
I think he's going to care about the
other things more. So, um, that's one
for the Japanese. Rightly or wrongly,
their government and educated people
consider it existential. And they're
looking at China going, "That's our
future if we don't fix things." And
they're thinking the solution for Japan
is empire because in those days that
seemed to be the way powerful countries
ran things. So, it's a combination of um
logistical legitimate logistical
bottlenecks. Um Japan is since they're
going to be starting this thing, massive
preparations. The Russians aren't
planning to fight this thing. They're
thinking that I determine when the war
began, whether wars begin or end. Excuse
me, they don't.
>> So, I guess you're saying Russia doesn't
care about this conflict as
>> Russians. Zar Nicholas might, but his
population is fighting it.
So then he doesn't have the state
capacity to mobilize his
>> Oh, that's the whole problem with
Russia. Okay.
>> Um this is the power of institutions.
Japan clearly can mobilize. Boy, is it
doing well with the loans and all sorts
of things. It's using these
institutions. Whereas Russia, remember,
it doesn't have a legislature. it. Um
the Zar doesn't have a cabinet in the
sense he has ministers, but they don't
ever show up at his house at the same
time to sit around a table. He's just
doing them one at a time. And then the
Romanov family have lots of first
cousins, right? You got everybody's
having lots of kids and so you got a
million first cousins and they are all
deployed throughout um the ministries
basically being the spy system for the
Romana family of what's going on. Are
any of these nice rich boys particularly
competent? No.
>> I I want to understand um World War I.
They are able to mobilize many more men.
They obviously there was incompetence in
World War I as well, but like the sheer
if there's the amount of resources that
the Zar was able to bring to bear one,
they brought to the far east during this
conflict.
>> Look at a map and you'll see the railway
grid is much more extensive in European
Russia and they this is where Count
Sergey Veta their finest uh minister
late Zarus period he's the one who's
doing trying to do his version of a
major restoration in his purview which
is the finance ministry financing all
these railways. So there are many more
railways and this is where Russia's
population is. This is where their
historical u security threats come from
and Russians can get on board with
protecting European borders.
>> Once the Trans Siberian railway is
finished in 1905,
>> just part of Manuria. It's not the the
one that goes on their side of the
boundaries not completed until World War
I.
>> I'm excited to announce my new sponsor,
Hudson River Trading. They're a quant
firm that accounts for around 15% of all
US equities trading volume. And almost
all of this trading goes through their
deep learning models. But predicting
market movements is just insanely hard.
You have to deal with imperfect
information, all kinds of hogynous data
with minuscule signal to noise ratios,
and impossibly tight latency
constraints. And if this weren't enough,
you're in this arms race against some of
the smartest people in the world who are
continuously training their models
against the data that you output.
Because of this, HRT has built their
internal AI team like a Frontier Lab.
They've aggregated trillions of tokens
of market data across every asset class
and invested in a massive cluster of
B200s. And they've built up an
exceptional team of researchers to do
fundamental ML research. Honestly, in
terms of AI, the big differences between
them and a frontier lab is that well,
one, HRT is very profitable, but two,
their engineers and researchers not only
have to make their models performant at
scale, but also have to battle test them
in this insanely adversarial
environment. If you want to join them,
you can learn more at hudson
rivertrading.com/barcash.
Okay, back to Sarah. I want to double
click on what part of the major
reformation exactly helped Japan
mobilize for this war because okay the
popularation is literate you have um
institutions for having political say
but like how exactly does that help you
have more people go to the front
>> I don't know the answer but I know
Japanese I mean talk about a culture
that's about detail about hard work
about service to the emperor Right. Um
I've done uh in your earlier podcast
series a whole series about bushido
uh that they're imbued with service um
to the emperor and that if you go in
wars you win them. And so that's part of
their culture. Now Russians don't al
also don't like being messed with when
people invade them. But this time
they're invading other people in an
irrelevant part of the empire. And it's
at a time when Russia is trying to
industrialize itself. But they haven't
put enough money into their education
system. So they have a bunch of
illiterate troops running around. And
let's face it, how can you read any of
the manuals or do anything? Oh yeah, and
some of their generals. Uh, one of them
didn't know what a howitzer was. One of
the guys who's planning stuff. And he
can't read maps.
The level of incompetence of having
royal favorites in your officer corps.
Well, they make these uh decisions. Also
there's split command in the
RussoJapanese war. So there's General
Kurapotkin who is the professional who's
actually had fought in in the the
Ottomans and so he act but those are
colonial wars and he'd won some of
those. He's the professional but then um
Admiral Alexev who's the illegitimate
son of I can't remember which Zar and a
favorite uncle I believe of Nicholas II.
He's out there and no one knows who's
actually in command except the royal
favorite is probably the better bet. And
so Kurapotkin
wants to not engage the Japanese until
that's way inland because he wants to
extend their lines and then clobber
them. And all these aristocrats that
don't know what they're talking about
said, "No, no, no, no, no. We're not
going to let these uh these racial
inferiors do whatever. We're going to
take them on immediately." Well, okay.
Try that. Ker Podkin strategy probably
would have worked. Mhm.
>> Just bring them on inland and and let
them enjoy it. Like Napoleon Bonapart,
you want to get to Moscow, have at it.
Then try winter in Moscow.
>> One really interesting takeaway from
this lecture and I'm curious if you
agree with this is we when we think
about this period in history, we often
think of Japan as the rising power in
Asia.
>> But it seems like the takeaway here is
actually Russia was on the path to be
the dominant power here. their
population is so much bigger. If the
efforts to modernize worked, they would
just have a 4x bigger population, but
then they could have had the modern
industry Japan has. And so, um, we're
not later on for obviously for the the
bullsh revolution and the civil war and
collectivization,
um, Russia would be dominant and Japan
seeing this acts early to, so I I guess
I didn't put it in those terms before I
heard this lecture. Would you agree with
that?
>> Well, I'm going to give you a tangential
answer then you tell me what where what
I'm missing. The sorrow of Russia is
here they have this incredible land
natural resources in the works
and they're really hung up on empire on
having lots of territory and they live
in a difficult neighborhood. Vitta is
telling Nicholas, "Forget about the
Asian adventures. We need to build more
railways in European Russia." And he was
right because if they could have
mobilized uh better in World War I, you
might get some different outcomes. Also,
you might have avoided the food riots in
St. Petersburg, which is what topples
the Rolanov dynasty. If you'd actually
provided enough food to St. Petersburg,
maybe you don't have those riots because
you have the railways running and
things. And so, Russia is a story of
misin misinvestment. Look at it today.
If Putin had taken all of his oil money
and invested it in the transportation
grid, because believe it or not, Russia
still just does things by train, its
road systems are appallingly bad. And if
Russia actually cleaned up its legal
system, which under the Zars it hadn't
done either, everything is always royal
monopolies. If they had cleaned up these
things to allow individuals to make
their own investments and make money,
it'd be a completely different story.
But AAR couldn't stand merchants.
communists hated them even more and um
cultural differences and then the
Russians aren't known for being
meticulous and hardworking the way
Japanese are. Russians are known for to
be hard drinkers, right? And they're
also known for being brutal.
>> Let me take another different stab at
your thesis.
>> Go for it. So it's not Japan's strategic
brilliance which mainly explains why
they won the war
>> but rather the fact that Russia could
have kept going even after the Baltic
fleet is uh is sunk even after they've
lost in Mukdan. But what changes is in
1905 you have this massive peasant
revolution. You have mass strikes in the
cities. You have bloody Sunday in uh
January. So the the Zar's government
almost collapses to the point that he
has to at least give the perception of
instituting major reforms.
>> Unclear whether it's going to collapse.
>> This is maybe a tangent but when I had
uh Steven Cochen the Stalin biographer
on
>> might know more about it. So it was
Japan cannot be um claimed credit for
the fact that there was these
longstanding issues in Russia which
almost brought down the government in
1905. This was a lucky break that they
got which forced Russia and the ZAR to
reallocate their efforts from the fight.
>> That's a good argument. He might be
right. This is why I think counterar
we'll never get definitive answers
because you'd have to be in Nicholas
II's brain, right? It's an autocracy.
What he decides matters. I dare say if
he had been Peter the Great, uh the guy
who tortured his only son to death
and suffered numerous setbacks, I doubt
that he would have um had any problems
uh dealing with uh rioting Russians. he
would have figured out uh who are loyal
units and then just blow away whatever
is getting in his way and he would have
done his initial his next battle and
then when he won that battle the Russian
revolution would have gone away because
they would have gone see we did it we
got these people so um but it's the
Cotkins argument is a is a very good one
um but uh it's to me it's Nicholas and
incompetent leadership is the bigger
thing and then you're arguing about how
important is the rebellion and how deep
root it is and you'll never know right
what this cockin could be absolutely
right and I think this is a a reason one
of the reasons I gave the um uh
counterargument is to get used to
understanding ambiguity and appreciating
that other people could be right and you
may not know
>> so
>> and to be clear I'm not sure if that's a
I don't want to put words in Cockin's
mouth uh so I'll just put them in my
mouth I won't blame him for any errors I
make okay Another thing that I think is
super interesting in this um in this
period is it it potentially helps
explain why Japan thought that Pearl
Harbor might work because superficially
these two situations seem similar. In
both cases, you begin with uh this
imminent threat that an adversary of
yours is going to gain massive military
leverage over you. So in the 19054 war
with Russia, it's that the Trans
Siberian railroad finished. In World War
II, it's the worry that after Japan
invades French Indochina, America does
an oil embargo in Japan. That gives them
1 to two years of oil runway before
their entire empire collapses and grinds
to a halt without oil. So there's this
worry that they have to act now. Um
otherwise they lose their they're about
to lose their leverage. And then there's
this initial surprise attack. So Port
Arthur in 1904 and then obviously Pearl
Harbor and even if you look at other
battles like uh Midway and Muckdton this
is we'll have this sort of annihilating
battle where we will expend our blood
and just push them back.
>> Curious to get your take on this
>> interpretation. One of them is in both
cases Japan's seeing a window of
opportunity that I got to operate in
this window and get it over with and it
works out. It's if you're doing that,
that's a high-risisk strategy to get
away with it. And so this is back to the
the that they were just lucky argument.
Another thing is you can look at um why
certain wars turn out. And um another
concept is a cooperative adversary.
What's a cooperative adversary? It's not
one that wants to cooperate with you,
but it's one that that doesn't play its
cards remotely well. And if you can
think about literally playing cards, if
you're playing a game with a little
child, they're trying to win, right? But
they're a cooperative adversary because
they just don't know how to play
whatever the game is. And you could
argue that Nicholas II is a cooperative
uh adversary and that's required and the
United States is not remotely a
cooperative adversary and it goes really
badly for Japan. And then it's also uh
there's another piece which is uh when
you run one successful war um quite
often you think it was easier than it
actually was and less risky than it
actually was like this country does Gulf
one where um the allies pay for the
whole thing. No Americans die hardly at
all. Loads of Iraqis die. Uh they're out
of Kuwait within days. I mean wow. Uh,
and then people are complaining we
should have marched onto Baghdad. Well,
okay, we did that. That didn't work out
so well. But, um, then after you do one
of these things and you think you're
good to go. And in Japan's case, between
the two uh, SinoJapanese war and the
RussoJapanese war, it shifted the
balance of civil and military power in
Japan. And people thought that it's the
military officers that did the right
thing and that the diplomats lost the
peace. in the RussoJapanese war they're
saying we didn't get a big indemnity
like as we did in the last war well
you're getting the whole Russian railway
system that's an indemnity in kind but
that's not what they're seeing so it
shifts the balance of power and then in
addition this maji generation the prime
um civil leader itto Hiaboomi is um
assassinated by a Korean revolutionary
because the Koreans don't much like
Japanese and their empire so he dies as
oh gosh it's a decade plus before
Yamagata does and so that gives Yamagata
and military friends another decade to
insinuate the roots of military
institutions and civil institutions are
not uh being built and then you can go
well look at the Japanese are
incompetent because their institution
building was inadequate well in one
generation you can't do it all right and
institutions take generations to really
sink roots so they did as much as they
could in a generation but um their
leadership uh was bereft compared to
this is why the Maji generation is truly
a brilliant set of leaders and what
comes after their children and
grandchildren are not.
>> Yeah. But this is also another very
important point. So the fact that the
civilian leader of the major generation
dies before the military leader
reinforces the contingency of history.
It didn't have to be that he died first,
but then that sort of changes
potentially the whole trajectory of
history. Yeah, individuals, trends, the
whole thing matters. And there's no
saying, I mean, maybe if he'd stuck
around it, everything would have been
the same since you can't rerun the
experiment. This is where again
counterarguments are useful on so many
human endeavors. You just don't have
complete data or and maybe it's and when
you're doing things in the here and now,
maybe the data will come in a little
later or it just doesn't exist. And yet,
you got to make decisions. And so if
you're not willing to change your mind,
you're just going to double down on bad
decisions. And it's incredible the
number of people who don't want to
change their minds. And that's why the
why I made a big to-do about giving the
argument counterargument rebuttal
framework because it I think it helps
get you out of the rut so that you can
change your mind. Like you're going to
tell me that Cotkins got this thing and
I'm wrong. I'm gay. Maybe he's right.
>> I I don't care uh who's right. I care
what's right.
>> Right. But going back to the question of
okay what was what what exactly was um
different between the Russo Japanese war
and world war II what was Japan's
miscalculation
>> one of them has to be that um in the
case of Russia they attacked an
adversary that was
it took one year of conflict to push
them to the point of significant
destabilization of the government
whereas if if you thought the same thing
would happen with America we're going to
attack Pearl Harbor and there's going to
be all kinds of internal conflict and
they just misjudged the internal level
of cohesion and functionality of
American institutions, right? They
thought the same thing would happen in
that happened in Russia would happen.
>> They're missing the whole war. Their war
is with China. Uh instead of isolating
the adversary, they bring in a whole new
slew of adversaries, right? They're
having trouble with China. That's the
second SinoJapanese war. We all get all
excited when we're involved, but it
starts in 1931. And their objective soon
becomes an unlimited objective. They
eventually want to do regime change in
China. Whereas in the first SinoJapanese
war, Yamagan is thinking about doing
regime change and the government pulls
them out because it's buddy, don't do
that. We're going to have all kinds of
foreign powers intervening if you try.
And then in the RussoJapanese war,
they're not trying to do regime change
in Russia. But in the second
SinoJapanese war, they absolutely are
trying to do regime change. They get
more and more frustrated. Then their
solution to that one is to attack all
the colonial in interest in Asia. That's
when Pearl Harbor happens and then
they're bringing us the British and that
brings the British Commonwealth. So it's
Australia and New Zealand that do
significant fighting and then um the the
Netherlands. So it's a different event.
>> I want to go back to the major reforms.
So the Yakura mission which is sent to
Prussia to understand what what did
Bismar do, right? I think it's funny
because Sergey White, who's the finance
minister 1892 to 1902, he models himself
as Russia's Bismar. He wants to do the
kind of industrialization that Germany
went through in Russia. And yet the
major generation succeeds in Japan in
doing this kind of thing. In both cases,
there's an authoritarian government that
wants to have this kind of top down
reform.
>> Why does it work in Japan but not in
Russia? Uh Russia has a just a
phenomenal illiteracy rate. It's an
empire which I think gets in the way. If
you look at how many nonRussian people
they're trying to dominate, it's like
they're perennially overextended, right?
Because they're perennially occupying
places that don't actually make them
much money. In fact, they probably cost
them more money to hang on to. Uh and so
they're perennially doing that. Um I
believe the Japanese are known to be
incredibly hardworking. I believe the
Chinese are known to be very
hardworking. I have never heard anyone
say the Russians are known to be
hardworking. Right? Maybe I missed
something. I've heard they're like
artists and they have the Russian ruska
their soul. Okay, great.
I mean that's like a big excuse to
saying well you know we may fail at
everything but our soul is superior.
Um, so I think there are these other
things that are uh at work. And in
Germany, it's it's the center of Europe.
It's a highly developed place. It
already has high levels of literacy.
There's a lot more to work with in
Germany. And it already has a a better
infrastructure for Russia. It's huge.
When you're trying to build railway
systems, just enormous. And think about
Trans Siberian. If you just took all
that track, just lengthen put it all
over European Russia, you really have
something there.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, okay. So, this is a quote from
Sunyatsen, who was the first and
short-lived leader of the Chinese
Republic in 1912. He says, quote, we
regarded the Russian defeat by Japan as
a defeat of the West by the East. We
regarded the Japanese victory as our own
victory. Now, we know that just 10 years
prior, China and Japan had fought a war
together. We know that um in 20 years,
there's going to be a brutal invasion of
China by Japan
>> where millions of Chinese will die. So,
help me understand why during this
period, at least the Chinese
revolutionaries and reformers, it seems
like Japan is the the power to emulate.
>> All right. Well, first of all, he's the
founding father of modern China. It's
one of the few things that the Taiwanese
and the PRC agree on that he's the
founding father of chi of modern China
and it's positive what they think about
him. Um remember when I told you on the
Russo uh Japanese war uh how they're
paying for everything in Manuria uh that
the Chinese actually thought that and
that one that it would be a good thing.
also understand when the manchus lose
it's um in Chinese uh the war is called
theqing Japanese war
>> Manchu Japanese war so the Japanese are
defeating the Manchus who you may not
particularly like if you're a Han
nationalist so you can relate to that
and the Japanese were not um well it
they got in and out of that thing and so
it's I think that's the key and the
really really really ugly brutal stuff
is going to happen in the second
SinoJapanese war where the Japanese do
things that are unforgivable. The
problem for um the first SinoJapanese
war is um it's detonating Confucianism
and so what's it going to replace that
with? Sunyatt Sen is going to do
nationalism and and work it that way.
But I think that's the the big answer.
But you're quite right um that uh as
things went on as it sinks in that Japan
is the dominant player in Asia cuz first
you have a war and that's happened but
you're
focusing on all your civil wars and
other stuff and it hasn't sunk in that
this is not an exception. It's going to
go on for a century. Um I suspected that
it's gradual for the Chinese to get
really upset
>> uh about Japanese in particular and it's
what they do in the second son or
Japanese war. It's like it's
unbelievable
>> because when they start losing they get
they get brutal.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Something that wasn't emphasized
in the lecture but seems quite important
to explaining why Japan was able to be
so dominant in this period is despite
the fact that it has a much smaller
population than so China this time is
400 450 million people Russia's 130
million what's going on in Japan of
major reforms what specifically are they
enabling and if you look at the fraction
of GDP that China is spending on defense
the country is sort of imploding So it's
like less than 1%. Um Russia is also not
spending uh nearly as much of its uh you
know output on defense. Japan in the
preceding 10 years is spending 5% of
output on defense and in 1904 spending
10% of output on defense. And so that
ability to marshall and it's a smaller
place but you can
>> marshall resources.
>> You can marshall the whole res towards
this defense effort seems like very
important to understand.
>> It is but there's another piece. China
is not really a unified state in this
period. If you think about what people's
loyalties are, it's to province and
place. It's not to the whole China. I
mean, they're all part of it, but it's
the place. I'll give you an example. So,
China has three fleets and the ones that
I've been talking about, I didn't use
it. It's the northern fleet. And in the
Sino French war, the southern Fujian
fleet or whatever it is, the southern
one that's fighting in uh well, it's
Indochina in those days, it wants the
northern fleet to come down and help
them. And the northern fleet says hell
no.
>> So in the SinoJapanese war, when the
northern fleet wants the southern fleet
to come help it, the answer is hell no.
And it it also has to do with how are
these forces being financed? Provincial
governors are financing it.
>> Mh. And so they want to use these forces
for province, they don't want to send it
out of province. And in a traditional
world where China is just worrying about
some barbarians on horses way off and
wherever, uh, that works well enough
because if they come riding in, you can
probably eventually deal with it in
Province One and it'll eventually work.
But all of a sudden these western powers
come and then the Chinese very foolishly
um fight in the treaty ports and what
they should have done is said um hey
come on in 25 miles and see how you like
it.
>> All right let's try 50 and the British
would have had real trouble with that
and it's a real failure of strategy um
that they can just own.
>> So they love to complain about the
foreign Chinese today about foreign
imperialists and they don't look at
their own gross incompetence. They uh
what is it the uh this country the we're
dealing with Britain. Britain's a lot
closer to us than it was to China. Uh
their population was larger than the
American colonists and George Washington
friends gave them a run for their money,
right? Uh the Chinese, what's their
problem? They should have been able to
deal with it. But it's it's a it's a
case of lacking leadership, lacking
institutions that these things matter.
You have all the resources in the world.
So this country needs to watch it. We
may have all the resources in the world
but if we don't organize our pro our
ourselves appropriately or if we do a
whole bunch of own goals with our own
leadership it will cause problems. Um
talk about the long run institutional
effects of history the what you just
mentioned about the provincial
governments controlling a large share of
Chinese resources. You go from that
period. So under the diction dynasty
then you have the republic then you have
the waring states period then you have
the Japanese in control of parts of the
country and then you have the communists
and or part nationalists and then
communists.
>> Yeah. Constant warfare.
>> But after five different regime changes
this dynamic in China today um in the US
50% of output like government uh
spending is done by the federal level
50% is done by the state level. Um and
in China it's 85% of the local level,
15% of the national level. And a big
problem recently has been the fact that
the local government has financed a lot
of construction that wasn't economically
valuable. But this, you know, you can go
back a hundred years to this peri more
than 100 years to this period and the
the same problem of provincial
governance
still comes up again
>> under theQing there. Um it was uh local
areas had to finance all of the
government. The central government
didn't finance any hardly anything and
that was always a problem and led to
massive corruption because if you don't
have a budget then you have to do um
some way of of of getting graft or
something from people to to pay for
things. So this is a enduring and um
it's a a different institutional setup
of how you're going to run things.
institutions matter. They um channel
decision making. Uh they channel how
money can or can't be made. It's
consequential. So part of the reason
that Russia loses is that it this is not
the main priority for them. Um but if
that's the case before the war, Japan
pres uh Japan produces agreement which
would allow Russia to maintain their
sphere of control over Manuria. Japan to
maintain their sphere of control over
Korea and then Russia refuses this
>> right
>> and that's why Japan decides to do the
surprise attack.
>> Yeah. Um, obviously after the war,
Russia is in a much more dis
advantageous position. But do we
understand why they were not game to
consider this before the war?
>> Because it's a gross underestimation
of the enemy. They're thinking these
people are a bunch of nobodies. And then
Nicholas II had an unfortunate incident
in Japan. Who knows whether this
influenced him or not. So he does the
royal tour right while his dad's still
alive. and he goes all the way around,
winds up in Japan and um a samurai there
or somebody tries to assassinate him
with a sword. So Nicholas always has a
scar um up here and so I imagine that
didn't leave happy memories of uh the
Zarovich.
>> It is a pretty cool story though. I
almost got assassinated by a samurai and
here's my scar.
>> Yes, whatever. Anyway, that's what
happened to him. And but I think it's a
disgross it's it's the feeling that
there's no need, right? And it it goes
back to grossly underestimating other
people and the problem with racism. You
know, you think you're so special and
other people are so unspecial. Wrong.
>> And then the Japanese are amazing. Think
about it. They're on the group of seven
of major economies, right? They are the
And it's major economies and major
democracies. they're the only
non-western power there and they don't
get there out of charity. It's out of
their own achievements. So, um it's an
it's an enormous achievement. And what's
tragic about World War II is if they
hadn't done that, people will be looking
at the Maji reforms in order to model
what they're going to do to get over the
hump and develop. But in fact, a lot of
the things that Dang Xiaoping does in
terms of investments and things rhymes
with Maji reforms and know and if you
look at the what is it the four little
tigers that originally Singapore, Hong
Kong and uh was it Korean Taiwan
whatever I'm missing uh a lot of their
development it parallels in a lot of
ways of what the Maji reformers did.
Well, these are Japanese ideas, but
they're not getting credit for them
because of the brutality of World War II
where you're thinking of that and
thinking, well, if I say nice things
about Japan, it's I'm endorsing this
other stuff. No, they're two separate
topics, different generations.
>> I want to better understand the degree
to which the level of technology
in a country matters for its military um
capabilities. Because at this time
countries are just buying armaments from
more advanced countries. So China in the
1894 war, China has bought two German
battleships, many other vessels. Japan
has no battleships. Um and then in the
1904 1905 war with Russia, both Japan
and Russia have you know British ships
um because of the alliance that Japan
had with Britain. And then Russia also
has friendships. So if they're able to
procure the most advanced weaponry from
the west,
>> does it matter what their level of
technological development?
>> Yeah, you have to learn how to use it,
>> right? So it's and you have to maintain
it. The Russians had this fancy fleet
that their aristocrats wanted to buy. So
they're good at cutting checks.
>> Um but they aren't doing any training on
it. If you do numbers of days, like days
at sea for the Russians, it's laughable.
And also it's cold. summit all winter,
no one's going anywhere. Whereas the
Japanese um are constantly deploying
their forces, they're learning, doing
all kinds of practice and things. So you
can imagine uh if you don't do any
practice, it's not going to go very well
for you. Um but on the counterargument
to this technology
is um if the value of the object is high
and if you're like an intervening power
messing in somebody else's country it
may not matter on the technology it or
it matters but that these people will
never give up. So in the American
Revolution the British had us on
technology. I mean, it's incredible.
They actually could supply in a age of
sail and horses, they could supply
things by uh sailboats and keep it
going. Uh but we were just totally
obnoxious and we would never give up,
right? And uh this was the problem with
the United States in Afghanistan. Talk
about a backwards place. Doesn't get
more backwards. Or Iraq is the locals
just never gave up. They may not have
the technology, but it's like it's our
house and we want you out of here. We're
never quitting. And this would be
Russia's problem in Ukraine is uh
it's it's an uh it's going to go on.
>> Mhm.
>> So technology is important, but also the
value of the object. What is the
relative value of whatever you think win
is? And if you look at if you're an
Iraqi, it's a lot higher for you than it
is for some American intervening there.
or if you're looking for a Japan and
empire, it's a lot higher for Japanese
who are looking at China and thinking
that's going to be their fate. And maybe
they're misidentifying the cure. That's
a whole different matter, but that's
what they look at it than for Russia,
which is who even cares? There's nothing
this part of the world actually offers
Russia other than bigger uh more lines
on a map that looks bigger. So,
>> um, speaking of winning, after the war,
as you mentioned, Theodore Roosevelt
mediates the peace treaty between Russia
and Japan, and he wins the Nobel Peace
Prize for this.
>> At least one president gets one.
>> And the the the treaty of Portsouth is
heavily criticized in Japan in the
following years for not giving them the
concessions they feel are warranted as a
result of their victory. I don't think
there's any reparations. There's many
territorial disputes that don't end up
landing spec in Japan's um corner. So
potentially a lesson to learn here is
that you should uh if you give two
relaxed peace terms then the person who
wins will feel agreved and they'll go go
at it again. Although the other lesson,
you know, if you have a treaty of
Versailles where it seems like you
should learn the opposite lesson that if
you have two aggressive peace terms,
then the person who lost will come back
and have this sense of um uh a sense of
being agrieved and this is a general
problem in history. It feels like
there's an equal and opposite lesson.
>> Different types of wars. One's a war for
unlimited objectives, which is what
World War I eventually becomes. We're
trying to do regime change all over the
place which is whereas you're doing a
limited war for Japan. Japan you also
you have to have a feasible objective.
If Japan had demanded more at those
peace talks Nicholas II would have gone
back to war and he would have
slaughtered them because he had all
these cracked troops that are just
sitting there in theater and the
Japanese literally don't have the men.
So that Russia would it's got three
times the army now. It's it's there and
they got they can bring them in at
100,000 a month. And we just saw the
mukten where the Russians had 125,000
more men than the Japanese. Well, if
they can ship at 100,000 a month, wait a
few months and then it's going to get
really ugly. So, it wasn't feasible. And
there's another piece. So, you're going
to go fight a war and then you lose a
lot of people. And that's why the
Japanese are feeling they should have
gotten more because you've got General
Nogi who's committing suicide over this.
And the poem at the very beginning I
showed you the Maji Emperor also has
this feeling of sorrow is that uh wars
you start losing. This is Putin's
problem. He's lost so many people. He
didn't feel sorrow but he needs to get
revenge that's equivalent to make up for
that. So the longer these wars go on,
the harder it is to stop them. And so on
Versailles it's a a different story
because uh there is an unwillingness to
enforce the peace and there is also a
feeling of particularly in France and
also Britain to get really even with the
Germans and then the United States is an
irresponsible
power in those days where
one of the reasons you get World War II
has to do with the Great Depression
which is not strictly related to the
Versailles peace term term uh
terminating the war that if you hadn't
had the great depression maybe the
Versailles settlement would have been
good enough we'll never know and one of
the reasons the great great depression
gets so bad is because this country
doesn't want to act as the lender of
last resort which is what Britain had
done in the past but it couldn't after
World War I it had been bankrupted and
our country is irresponsible these
problems are on the other side of the
sea and we think, "Okay, America first
and whatever and we're going to uh raise
tariffs and things and all we do is tank
the global system." Whereas, if you're
the lender of last resort, you're going
to put money into the system as it's
collapsing to prevent it from collapsing
so that it can get its so that it can
rebound. And that's why it's important
to do that. Yeah, it's expensive, but
boy, a great depression is a lot more
expensive. So, they're different
problems.
>> Is there a lender or last resort today?
Isn't that the problem?
Well, that's what the IMF and things are
about. But it used to be that this
country uh was willing to take on uh
these burdens of last resort and in the
area of nuclear weapons, nuclear shield,
right? And we're trying to shed these
things right now. And we shall see.
Well, it'll at at bare minimum it'll
make us the uh ex sort of the irrelevant
power instead of the essential power
because Europe is going to reorganize
itself and they have the institutions to
do it. And the United States used to be
the leader of the West. Well, it's going
to it's going back home to Europe.
Europe's going to lead the West. They
invented it and they're perfectly they
have an extensive set of institutions to
do this and they're already starting to
marginalize us by putting out feelers to
set up trade agreements with Asian
countries with South American countries.
It'll take them a while to do this. Once
they do it, we will be on the outside of
it if we don't uh change our minds. and
uh they're going to get stronger
institutionally
>> and um uh what is it? Churchill said
something about allies. The only thing
worse than working with allies is
working trying to survive without them.
>> That uh you that um you're better off uh
with lots of friends going after bullies
in the world than you are by yourselves
>> and we'll find ourselves by ourselves.
And um other countries have tried to
tangle with China all by themselves.
Japan did it when China was an
undeveloped country. It did not work
well. It You want to have friends when
you do this. Uh but we're making pivotal
errors and we will pay for them. May
maybe this is a subtle but recurring
disagreement between us uh that has come
up in different Q&A
>> is uh but I I do want to
>> find the crux
>> I could be wrong
>> is um that
>> it seems like the quality of
institutions is central in your thinking
of how well a country will do or how
central it will be in the future and for
me it's much more just like how big is
your economy how big is your population
and so let me just finish the thought
I if you think that the center of I
don't know the western uh western
alliance shifts to Europe maybe you
think like oh their institutions are
good and that's why it'll happen but it
seems to me America is just such a big
and powerful country economically that
it would be difficult for Europe to
displace us even if we make these
mistakes in terms of our alliances and
diplomacy
>> well let me ask you a question why isn't
it that Argentina which is a really big
country tremendous resources why isn't
it a great power.
>> This economy sucks. I think of it as his
economy was better. I think
>> of But why does his economy suck, excuse
me, not my choice of words,
>> but that that's a result of mistakes in
domestic policy with Peronism, not with
its mistakes in foreign engagement.
>> Oh, okay.
>> I agree that the domestic policies
matter a lot.
>> Okay. But isn't aren't we talking uh
peron is a populist leader? Populists by
definition aren't people who are
institutionalists. They're like me. I'm
so special kind of person. And so,
aren't you actually telling me that
Argentina has inadequate uh in uh
domestic institutions and they fail?
>> Agreed. So,
this is uh this is great because then
we're identifying the real crux.
>> Um so that maybe the crux is we both
agree that institutions matter. I think
they really matter because they shape
the trajectory of economic growth.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Okay. But I think like the sort of like
effects on
>> right look at Russia. I mean lousy
institutions that place should be rich.
But so I think Europe's institutions are
still bad because the rate of economic
growth in Europe is quite bad. Whereas
you they might think they're better than
I I think they are because they're
they're like good at diplomacy.
>> I suspect that this crisis now because
it's existential with Putin that it will
force them to clean up these
institutions. It will take them time.
Maybe I'll be dead wrong or maybe I'll
be wrong dead. Who knows how that all
works. But um I suspect because usually
an existential threat is clarifying
and you can see Ukraine trying
desperately to clean up its institutions
has a lot further to go than Europe
does. Um I suspect that Europeans are
going to clean up some of this. It'll
take them time. It'll take them time,
but they have to because um the piggy
bank here is no longer willing to fund
their defense. And so there there's
merit and the Europeans need to pick up
the tab on their defense and they should
have done it earlier. Without a doubt,
there's merit to that. Um but the way
we're doing it where we're going to cut
ourselves out of the action, you want to
put the screws on, but you want to also
keep yourself part of it. Uh we're
overdoing it in some fronts. Yeah.
>> And also you're doing it in such an
incent uh insulting way. I'll give you
some Mchavelli on this one. So he's the
founding father of political science. He
talked about motivating people with
fear, love, and hate. and he's talking
about the in the prince these princes
and he says um he he just says forget
about love because you can't make people
like you right you can do everything
people still don't like you um and he's
a big man and saying make them fear you
because you can really motivate people
but he says don't make them hate you if
they hate you they will um fight you
well if you're running around serially
spitting your allies in the in the uh
face they are going to hate you and it
won't work out well it's just a it's a
bad strategy don't do it. Um the
clickbait of insulting someone who comes
to your house, uh that's very temporary,
but the hatred of it or and also other
people viewing it and going this is what
qualifies as American diplomacy. Those
memories are long term. It's unwise.
>> Uh are you gaining from some audience
questions?
>> Sure.
>> Okay. Anonymous asks,
>> anonymous brave person,
>> what is a good grand strategy for minor
power that wants the status quo to
continue? For example, president of
South Korea probably does not want China
and the US fighting over Taiwan.
>> It's allies and alliance systems. Uh
it's and uh smaller powers have been
tremendously influential in the
rules-based order on how it's developed.
In fact, they've provided some of the
really good ideas over the years. So,
it's cooperate because if you have
allies, this is what the United States
doesn't get. Yeah, we're big, but if
we're going after everybody else,
they're bigger. So, if you're small, and
this is how Europe is important, there a
lot of small countries or medium
countries, but when they get together,
they get powerful. When they add in
Japan, they got an equivalent G&P of us.
And then you start adding other people
in and they're bigger. And yes, it takes
a a long time to negotiate whatever the
agreement is going to be. But once you
agree, it's powerful. And so that's the
answer.
>> This is how we have as much of a
rules-based order as we do, which allows
everyone in the audience take a little
piece of plastic called a credit card.
Go to any country in the world pretty
much. I wouldn't go to North Korea, but
most countries. and you use that credit
card and if it says you have enough
money to buy a Mercedes and there's a
Mercedes in the shop, the chances are
the credit card will go through and you
can buy your Mercedes and it's just a
piece of plastic. But this is the
rules-based order that most of us are
into and it's it's because we agree with
each other on these things.
>> Denny Trimv asks, "What made Japan a
more fertile ground for Western ideas
than China? Was China just too big for
meaningful institutional change in the
same time scale?"
>> This is my guess cuz who knows? But I
think it's China is suffering from the
the incredible success of its
civilization. It had uh been the
dominant civilization of Asia forever
and ever for excellent reasons. I mean
if you look at the achievements of
China, they're amazing. And for Japan
um it had always been in China's shadow
and the Japanese had always tried to
learn from others. The Chinese also
learn from others. Um a lot of their
institutions come from the Manchus,
right? But they pretend that we cynify
these people and so they're actually Han
Chinese achievements. Well, not so much
actually. You've you've But the myth
lives on that that anything that's worth
knowing emanates from China. Well,
hubris, right? This is a human condition
and the Chinese get a fatal case. And
the argument what I'm wondering about is
whether this country has got a fatal
case right now of you know we know
everything, we can do everything may not
work out so well.
>> This leads in very nicely to the next
question. Lydia Deian asks, "In the
spirit of the major delegates sending
out to explicitly study the West, where
would the United States do well to send
delegates today?"
>> Delegates today, uh, our allies
and start by apologizing to them. That
would be step one. I can't see that ever
happening. Um, but yeah, it's it's uh
use these inter we have all these
international organizations. Use them.
Uh we're in the process of firing the
State Department. I believe when
Wikileaks uh leaked a lot of their memos
and things and the New York Times was
reporting on it, I believe what it
revealed is incredibly um accurate
reporting of whatever place they were
assigned to and describing things in
really accurate detail that would enable
US policy makers then to make an
accurate assessment and determine to do
what's next. But that's not what we're
doing.
>> This was actually a very interesting
take you gave to me uh offline once
which was uh that the Wikileaks
leaks of the State Department documents.
You were like, "Oh, wow. The they're
kind of on it. These like these seem
like good memos."
>> Well, I'm technically wasn't allowed to
read them because they were classified
and I was working for the Navy. So, I
didn't go out of my way to read them,
but I'm reading the New York Times and
other things. It's reporting on them.
And um from what's there, you just see
it's accurate um and it's in-depth
reporting. And of course, we're angry
that they're all out there because it's
revealing who's talking to whom and
whatever. But um uh what it showed is a
very professional staff and I don't know
why we got some axe to grind with the
state department. It's also really tiny.
uh working at the war college um on
student uh solutions to the world uh
world's problems and they would always
say quadruple the state department's
budget because it's really tiny compared
to the military budget because there's
an understanding that um what much of
the US government does if it's doing
what it's supposed to is it's preventing
catastrophes. So if you're sending your
state department out there, you're
trying to prevent oh like uh an
IndoPakistani nuclear war and we've sent
diplomats at different times to prevent
that from happening and who knows why it
didn't happen. Maybe it wasn't the state
department but all over the world trying
to prevent these things or um if you
think about the government it's about
setting all these standards to prevent
disasters. like I've talked to you
offline so this be repetitive for you um
but like you immunize people to prevent
disease can I pro prove uh who didn't
get what no I can't I can talk about
people who got bad reactions to it but
then there's a failure to understand
yeah there are these some bad reactions
but let's look at the much greater
number of people who are alive in our
own day and earlier when Roosevelt was
uh President Roosevelt had polio and
people were scared to death of getting
polio they understood about the
importance of these things and everyone
was lining standing up to get the polio
vaccine when Dr. Sock invented it. And
there are other things like uh having
enough meteorologists
uh to uh predict storms and so you can
get people out of summer camps when you
need to get the people out of summer
camps and having appropriate spending
the government funds to have the
appropriate um uh sirens and things. And
what people aren't looking they're
looking at the expense of doing these
things and saying it they're preventing
disasters and people it's the negative
objectives. So you can't measure the
things that fail to happen. But I assure
you averting a catastrophe you're saving
a lot probably a lot more than whatever
you're spending on the budget. And I get
it the the US government needs to be
much more efficient. I get it. But um uh
uh tearing the whole place down is going
to be a mistake and we will get more
catastrophes.
>> All right. Next month we're doing a
podcast with you and Elon together.
Oh, Elon. Oh, lucky me.
>> Oh, well, that's a whole other thing.
There are
>> Maybe we should save that for the next
lecture.
>> Okay. Oh, yes. Yes. The different
varieties of American hubris.
>> Yes.
Welcome to San Francisco, Sarah.
>> Well, well, one one variant of hubris a
is I'm an American. I don't need to
consult any other country and it's just
whatever Washington does or doesn't do
that determines how the world works.
It's halfcourt tennis. It ignores what
the other team's doing and it doesn't
work out well. And then there's a
Silicon Valley or whatever it is. It's a
a different variant. It's what I call
type two hubris. It's I'm incredibly
talented in one area, which he is
incredibly talented or whatever. He's
made himself a household word. Not not
everyone can do that. Um, but you're
thinking because I'm good at one thing,
this is transferable to everything else.
Well, okay, I got news. There's all
kinds of expertise and it's important,
but if I take a really good hairdresser
and make them an auto mechanic or the
auto mechanic a hairdresser, it is not
going to work out well. So, you have to
line these things up correctly. And this
type two um uh hubris is thinking, oh,
I'm smart at one thing and therefore I
can do everything. And these people are
making decisions in areas where they
have no expertise and it will not work
out well.
Um, great place to close.
>> Yes.
>> I hope you enjoyed this episode. If you
did, the most helpful thing you can do
is just share it with other people who
you think might enjoy it. Send it to
your friends, your group chats, Twitter,
wherever else. Just let the word go
forth. Other than that, super helpful if
you can subscribe on YouTube and leave a
fivestar review on Apple Podcast and
Spotify. Check out the sponsors in the
description below. If you want to
sponsor a future episode, go to
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Thank you for tuning in. I'll see you on
the next one.